Systematic approaches to use ecosystem information in advice processes are needed. In the U.S., these include stock level Ecosystem and Socioeconomic Profiles (ESPs), Management Council Scientific and Statistical Committee (SSC) catch advice procedures, and Council ecosystem approaches. Regular ecosystem reporting and maintenance of long term indicator time series are key components of a systematic approach. We present examples of ESPs, SSC and Council processes from the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council (MAFMC). ESPs can result in both direct quantitative integration of ecosystem data within stock assessments and more qualitative assessment of ecosystem risk factors presented along with the assessment. Both allow managers to take relevant ecosystem information into account when making decisions about stock management, such as in the MAFMC SSC catch advice and risk analysis process. The MAFMC ecosystem structured decision making process begins with risk assessment to characterize threats to managed species and fisheries, followed by conceptual modeling that identifies interactions between risks for a fishery. This in turn scopes management strategy evaluation focused on actions to achieve a set of management objectives while including key risks from climate, ecological, and socioeconomic interactions identified earlier in the process. Going forward, a systematic approach to developing decision processes that are able to use ecosystem information is key. The success of ecosystem approaches and continued use of ecosystem information in management hinges on scientist-management collaboration with stakeholder engagement throughout. Tools to support systematic ecosystem approaches are available worldwide: stock assessment, conceptual modeling, ecosystem reporting, and risk and vulnerability assessment. Stock level ESPs currently in development across the U.S. provide a key entry point into current stock assessment and stock-level management processes. Multispecies and system level indicators of productivity change, system limits, and overexploitation are available for testing and potential future use in more comprehensive system-level decision processes.

Session Description

Description
Failure to translate ecosystem science into management action can result when information is not conveyed to the appropriate management body or because of the nature of the information or the quality of the communication. We welcome contributions on products and processes that have been used to improve the conveyance of ecosystem information into the fisheries management process, especially those that have been used to inform tactical fisheries management decisions. We encourage studies that propose and/or compare products, processes, timing, visualization, and targeted audiences, as part of the management cycle. The end goal is to identify decision points, tools, and types of information that maximize uptake into fisheries management decisions and to identify the scales and contexts in which the various approaches work best. The formal presentations will be followed by a roundtable discussion among fisheries managers and policymakers to discuss the possibilities and challenges of applying the work presented.

